---
layout: post
title: ELSI Symposium &middot Heterogeneous formation of lunar crust
type: poster
---

Earthâ€™s Moon possesses a clear dichotomy between its nearside and farside
hemisphere. This asymmetry is both compositional and structural. The most
important features are the volcanic activity and radioactive heat sources
concentration on the nearside. Though the case for the causal relationship
between the two has been made, the origin of the concentration of radiogenic
elements is still unclear, despite numerous studies. The main hypotheses include
impact driven processes, asymmetrical crystallization of the early lunar magma
ocean and degree-1 Rayleigh-Taylor instabilities in the crystallized magma
ocean.

Recent analysis of the Japanese lunar orbiter Kaguya (SELENE) spectral profiler
showed that there is a significant difference in magnesium content relative to
iron between the two hemispheres. Iron is more incompatible than magnesium
therefore a higher magnesium number implies crystallization from a less evolved
magma ocean. This observation strongly favors an asymmetric crystallization of
the magma ocean as the cause for the present day observations. It is therefore
necessary now to re-investigate processes leading to asymmetric crystallization,
and their consequences on long term evolution.

In particular, I will discuss the influence of earthshine and
temperature-dependent tidal dissipation on the evolution of a tidally locked
Moon. The influence of earthshine has already been investigated in the past, but
we consider here earthshine from an early terrestrial magma ocean. In addition,
temperature-dependent tidal dissipation may help sustain and amplify any initial
asymmetry.

The following figure from Ohtake et al. (2012) shows the near and farside Mg#
distribution.

![Ohtake2012](/images/ohtake2012a.png)
![Ohtake2012](/images/ohtake2012b.png)
