---
layout: post
title: Lunar true polar wander inferred from polar hydrogen
type: paper
---

>Siegler et al., Nature, 531. [[PDF]](/papers/Siegler+2016.pdf)

The earliest dynamic and thermal history of the Moon is not well understood. The
hydrogen content of deposits near the lunar poles may yield insight into this
history, because these deposits (which are probably composed of water ice)
survive only if they remain in permanent shadow. If the orientation of the Moon
has changed, then the locations of the shadowed regions will also have changed.

The polar hydrogen deposits have been mapped by orbiting neutron spectrometers,
and their observed spatial distribution does not match the expected distribution
of water ice inferred from present-day lunar temperatures. This finding is in
contrast to the distribution of volatiles observed in similar thermal
environments at Mercuryâ€™s poles6. 

Here we show that polar hydrogen preserves evidence that the spin axis of the
Moon has shifted: the hydrogen deposits are antipodal and displaced equally from
each pole along opposite longitudes. From the direction and magnitude of the
inferred reorientation, and from analysis of the moments of inertia of the Moon,
we hypothesize that this change in the spin axis, known as true polar wander,
was caused by a low-density thermal anomaly beneath the Procellarum region.
Radiogenic heating within this region resulted in the bulk of lunar mare
volcanism and altered the density structure of the Moon, changing its moments of
inertia. 

This resulted in true polar wander consistent with the observed remnant polar
hydrogen. This thermal anomaly still exists and, in part, controls the current
orientation of the Moon. The Procellarum region was most geologically active
early in lunar history, which implies that polar wander initiated billions of
years ago and that a large portion of the measured polar hydrogen is ancient,
recording early delivery of water to the inner Solar System. Our hypothesis
provides an explanation for the antipodal distribution of lunar polar hydrogen,
and connects polar volatiles to the geologic and geophysical evolution of the
Moon and the bombardment history of the early Solar System.
